highways. Sometimes when you're driving
along them, it looks like this. But a
lot of the times, it looks like this
with homes right alongside. You have
people living right next to cars and
trucks spewing pollution and noise.
What's it like to live there? This isn't
a hypothetical for a lot of people. 4%
of the US population lives within 150 m
of a major highway, and 30 to 45% of
people living in big cities live within
500 m of a highway. That's a lot of
people.
Over on Blue Sky, I asked some people
what their experiences were like living
next to highways. They overwhelmingly
mentioned the noise, which according to
one person was so persistent it was
actually difficult to sleep without it.
But other people mentioned the pollution
and the huge barrier that highway
created in their neighborhood. There's a
whole bunch of research on this topic,
which I'll get into in the video. But
the headline is that living near a
highway is not a good experience. But
this video is more than just explaining
what it's like to live near a highway.
I'm also going to talk about the ways to
make it better to live near a highway.
Those highway sound barriers are there
for a reason. They are reasonably
effective. Yet even with sound barriers,
it's less than ideal. But cities keep
allowing for housing a stone's throw
from these polluting uses.
I'm not a great proponent of zoning, but
the parts where we keep houses away from
the polluting uses actually make sense
to me. Yet we continue to zone and build
housing right near pollution, highway
pollution. Let's find out the reasons
why you shouldn't live near a highway
and the reasons why we're still building
housing there after the bike bell.
>> [bell]
>> Okay, let's start with the obvious. If
you're living right up against a
highway, you're in for a bad time. But
there are a lot of different factors
that determine exactly how bad of a time
you'll find yourself in. Let's focus on
two. The first is how far away you are
from a highway, and the second is the
kind of highway, whether it be big or
small, short or tall. But before we go
full Dr. Seuss, let's talk about the
first factor, how far away you are from
the highway. One research article says
that if you're within 30 m or 100 ft of
a highway, you're basically going to be
getting a full dose of pollution. It's
like you're on the road. But researchers
refer to the pollution coming from
highways as a pollution gradient. The
further you are from the highway, the
less exposure to pollution you're
getting. And it's not a linear gradient,
like a simple straight line. It tapers
off pretty quickly, though people living
at 150 to 300 m are still getting above
the normal doses of pollution you'd
expect just by being alive in this
modern world. There are some
complicating factors here, however. One
is the wind. The pollution we're talking
about is air pollution. So, if you're
upwind of the highway, you might not be
getting much pollution at all.
But if someone is 500 m from a highway,
but also downwind of it, they could be
getting substantial pollution exposure.
That's why authors of one research paper
concluded that someone living 150 m or
500 ft from a highway will be exposed to
pollution 49 to 68% of the time.
Actually, not 100%. How you feel about
those numbers depends on whether you're
a pollution half full or a pollution
half empty kind of person. But either
way, weather makes a difference.
Exposure to all of this pollution can
result in elevated risk for developing
asthma for kids and an increased risk of
cardiovascular disease and respiratory
disease in adults. There's also an
increased risk of straight-up mortality,
too.
Now, you might be thinking to yourself
that all of this will get better when we
switch to electric vehicles. And that's
sort of true, but there are two problems
with that overall assumption. First,
while many places aim to forbid the sale
of gas-powered cars by 2035, cars sold
in 2034 can at last through 2050 or
longer. This is still a long-term issue.
Second, while EVs will usher in a
massive reduction of air pollution if
powered by renewable energy, there's
still some non-tailpipe emissions
generated by cars. This can come from
the form of road dust, tire wear, and
brake wear. EVs are generally quieter
than gas-powered cars, but highway
speeds, most of the sound coming from
cars is from the tires moving along the
surface of the roadway and not the
engines. And this is a good segue into
the topic of noise. There's an old
saying that cities aren't loud, cars are
loud, and there's no better way to
demonstrate that by talking right over a
highway, but I don't want to do the rest
of the video here, I'm going to head
back to the studio. Noise doesn't sound,
haha, that serious, but it has real
health impacts. It's called noise
pollution for a reason. One estimate
found that 1 million healthy life years
are lost annually from traffic-related
noise. And that's just for the study
area of Western Europe. Noise can also
adversely affect wildlife.
The health impacts of road noise can
come in the form of worse sleep for some
residents and an increase in the
production of stress hormones, which can
exacerbate conditions like high blood
pressure and heart disease. Just like
air pollution, the amount of noise
pollution hitting a resident's ears is
affected by the environment. Surfaces
like concrete and water reflect sound
well and can make road noise travel
further.
A road through a forest will be quieter,
though again, probably not great for the
animals living there. Engineers show
noise exposure through noise contour
maps. They follow a similar shape to air
pollution maps. If you're right up
against the highway, the noise is real
bad, but it falls off relatively
quickly, though there are still noise
impacts further away. And factors like
wind can affect the amount of noise you
hear. Like sometimes you might hear more
highway noise if the wind is blowing in
the right direction, while other times
you might not hear it at all. Very
similar to the air pollution situation
before. It's not just the air pollution
and noise that can emanate from a
highway. The vehicles themselves, via
the on-ramps and off-ramps, can enter
onto city streets and cause additional
noise and safety issues for nearby
residents.
When highway air pollution and noise
researchers do their thing, they often
actually include busy roads, not just
interstate highways. Busy roads can have
cars moving fast enough to create a lot
of noise, and the amount of traffic they
can handle can generate emissions in the
ballpark of a highway. And those busy
streets don't have the benefits of
things like noise barriers, which we'll
get to in a bit.
If you're living near a highway, on a
road that leads to a highway exit, it's
almost like a double whammy. You get the
negative effects of the highway and the
busy road. On top of that, you also get
traffic safety issues. On-ramps and
off-ramps are some of the most dangerous
places for pedestrians and cyclists.
Drivers are either gearing up to merge
into the fast-moving traffic or still in
a highway mindset getting off. Drivers
are velocitized, one of my favorite
They're just too used to going fast, so
when they drive on surface streets, they
go faster than they should.
We've talked pollution, but what about
property values? Surely it must make the
land around them cheaper, right? Well,
it's actually kind of complicated.
Obviously, when highway departments
destroyed neighborhoods to build
highways back in the old days, the
nearby properties lost a lot of property
value. It was another burden for the
likely low-income and non-white
communities that the highway went
through. Today, we're not building many
new highways through existing
residential areas, but we are living
with the property value implications of
past highway construction. One estimate
found that homes near a highway are 8 to
10% less valuable than those built
further away when you really can't hear
the highway. But perhaps
counterintuitively, another study found
that while there obvious drawbacks to
living near a highway, the convenience
factor of living close to one either
canceled out or straight-up eclipsed
those drawbacks, as shown in property
values. This study was done for
single-family homes in Phoenix and found
that there was a bit of a U-shape.
Property values were pretty neutral near
a highway on-ramp, with the positives
and negatives probably canceling out,
then went up close by but not directly
adjacent to the on-ramp. Then it
eventually tapered off again.
Okay, so we've got people saying that
their experience living near a highway
wasn't good, or the least the highway
part of it wasn't good. There's also
plenty of evidence that living near one
has real impacts from noise and air
pollution.
And while it is convenient to live near
a highway, it may depress property
values.
All of these things matter because lots
of people, like I mentioned at the
beginning of the video, live near a
highway. And many more may soon. It's
not uncommon for developers to continue
to build housing right next to a
highway, and for local governments to
zone for it and permit it.
This is tricky because we're in the
midst of a housing crisis, and building
more housing is one of the best ways to
get us out of that crisis. Los Angeles
is probably the most obvious place
dealing with both highways and a housing
crisis.
From 2000 to 2010, the population within
500 ft of a Los Angeles highway grew
3.9% compared with a rate of 2.6
citywide. Basically, housing is growing
faster in the shadow of highways. City
officials are divided. Some think it's
unrealistic to disallow housing
production near highways.
Highways are just everywhere in LA and
if you're telling people not to develop
near a highway, you're basically telling
them not to develop anywhere in the
city. And it's in the middle of a
housing crisis. But others acknowledge
that there are real and documented
health effects. If LA is the best place
to see this tension in action, then the
2017 LA Times article by Tony Barbosa
and John Schleuss is the best way to
learn about it. Go read it. I'll I'll
put it in the description. It's
top-notch journalism. And while I'm
recommending reading, also check out the
book City Limits by Megan Kimball. I'll
put a picture on screen. My My copy's at
home. It really gets into the inequities
around highway construction and
expansion in a way I didn't get to in
the video. She's also a journalist. We
have to save quality journalism so we
can continue to get these great,
well-researched perspectives.
But anyway, in in the LA Times article,
the authors cite decision-makers who
believe that we can mitigate these
effects of the highways, basically make
them not so bad. Is that actually
possible?
Well,
the city of LA now requires buildings
near a highway to have strong air
filters, though those are not great at
filtering out ultrafine particles.
And also not helpful if you want to use
a backyard or a balcony. But it is
something. The most common way to reduce
highway impacts, or at least the ones
that come to my mind, are are the
highway noise barriers. Those walls that
are built around the roads to keep sound
out of adjacent neighborhoods.
And they generally work. They can reduce
traffic noise by five to eight decibels
if deployed well. That may not sound
like a lot, but decibels are
logarithmic. A five decibel reduction is
the equivalent of cutting out a third of
traffic along a highway. That's not too
bad. There are a lot of technical
variables that can affect their
effectiveness and I had to read through
an entire Texas DOT report to learn
about this.
I'm starting to petition for Practical
Engineering to do a video on this topic.
Get on it, Grady. But if there's one
thing Texas knows, it's highways. There
are a couple of caveats with barriers.
They don't work if you're living on a
hillside overlooking a highway because
they're not really blocking any sound
for you. Higher barriers are better, but
even a short one can have some effect.
And berms can work well, too. Trenched
highways with berms along them are 3 to
5 dB quieter than normal surface
highways with no noise barriers.
Speaking of trenched highways, if an
urban highway is running below the
surface of the city below grade, then
capping the highway can not surprisingly
help with both noise and air pollution.
Dallas has been the leader in the US
building Klyde Warren Park in 2012 over
the Woodall Rogers Freeway. They're
building another Helper in Park over
I-35. It's also worth noting that that
cap also comes with a highway widening,
so it's not a perfect project by any
means. But, highway caps can reduce air
and noise pollution. For example, a
highway cap in South Korea reduced
nearby air pollution and reduced noise
by as much as 8 dB nearby. All of these
caps could also create new park space, a
nice amenity to have. Highway capping
doesn't work on at-grade or elevated
highways. This is the second major
factor. Remember, at the beginning of
the video when I talked about those two
factors affecting how living near a
highway will feel, right alongside the
whole distance thing.
A capped highway is pretty good. A
trench grade or sunken highway can be
okay-ish.
At-grade highways with sound barriers
are better than those without. The worst
of the bunch, the final boss, are the
elevated highways. These usually run
through urban areas, and they're
designed to be above grade because an
existing street network was already
there. It was most cost-effective to
just to build over the top than try to
trench or tunnel under. Elevated
highways elevate all the problems we
just mentioned before. They're up high,
spreading pollution and noise farther
than their other counterparts. They also
do more to create a visual divide in the
neighborhood. They're also just ugly.
The best option for many of these
highways is simply removal. Highways
don't belong in dense urban areas.
Vancouver, British Columbia, doesn't
have a single one in its city limits and
it's doing just fine. Cities have
started to get the message. Seattle has
torn down its Alaskan Way Viaduct and
replaced it with a surface boulevard.
Surface boulevards can still be noisy
and generate pollution, but they don't
usually carry as many heavy trucks, the
worst offenders for both.
Rochester, New York removed their
highway and added a road for more
housing. You can check out that video if
you want to learn more about highway
removals. It sounds drastic, but once
you understand that highways are like
horizontal smoke stacks, it starts to
make sense.
You know what's a heck of a lot better
than highways? Mass transit. It's
important for cities to have good
transit systems so those former highway
users have another option. Now, I know
that if you made it this far in the
video, you're probably anti-highway and
pro-transit. I can preaching to the
choir here. So, while I have you, I want
to make a quick recommendation. Jason
from the hugely popular YouTube channel
Not Just Bikes has developed his own
streaming series called Day Pass, where
he tries to ride all the transit in one
city on one day pass ticket. Along the
way, he talks about the history of the
lines, the modern urban context, and his
review of the service. It's like
watching a travel show with an urbanist.
I feel like this ad is the easiest I've
ever produced because I can't think of a
show that my audience would like more to
watch. It's a no-brainer, guys. It's the
goat of YouTube urbanism on European
transit.
And now you can watch exclusively over
on Nebula. We've actually got a ton of
urbanism content on Nebula in case Day
Pass somehow wasn't enough for you.
We've got channels like City Nerd,
Downey Live, Wendover Productions, and
my channel, too. I even have an
exclusive Nebula original series over
there of my own called Great Cities,
which chronicles the most important
pieces of infrastructure in the world's
greatest cities.
So, you will never be bored. Another
great thing about Nebula is that many of
us, including me, post our YouTube
content to Nebula early. I actually post
my videos one full video ahead. That
means that if you see a new City
Beautiful video up on YouTube, the next
one is already up on Nebula. I even have
a Nebula-only Discord server where you
can chat about the video long before
YouTube commenters. Those videos also
don't have YouTube ads. Nebula is
completely ad-free. You can get all of
this for surprisingly affordable price.
And when you sign up at my link
nebula.tv/citybeautiful,
you'll get 50% off an annual
subscription. My channel even get a
portion of that subscription fee as long
as you stay subscribed. So, it's one of
the best ways to support me and this
channel.
Nebula's also offering lifetime
memberships for people who want to go
above and beyond in their support of my
channel and the platform. I love that we
have a couple of different ways for
allowing people to show their support.
So, go click on the link and start
exploring both the content and transit
systems with not just bikes and day
passes.